So you said these books are difficult.
Maybe you can comment on which aspect is difficult.
Is it just the technical nature? Is it the length?
Is it the depth of the ideas or how long it takes to integrate them?
And more sort of importantly,
is there recommendation advice you can give on how to
integrate these ideas, how to read <laugh>,
how to learn in the space. Is there from your own life,
like how do you enjoy taking in ideas? And this could be for these books,
but also, uh, in the Bitcoin world and reading a bunch of different ideas,
uh, written by others, just integrating stuff, uh,
even watching pot CA and all those kinds of things.
Yeah. I I'm a reader. I love to read. Um,
one of the most useful things I've ever done was take a speed reading course.
I actually think there's a version of this available on Tim Ferris's website.
It's like a 30 minute speed reading course. It's all about high movement.
Instead of moving your eye continuously line over line,
it's more about jumping in your brain.
You can train your brain to just absorb words in their totality versus kind of
reading word by word.
And also not I've I haven't fully taken that journey actually, but, uh,
I remember taking a few steps on that journey,
realizing that I'm speaking inside my head. Yeah.
I'm saying the words inside of my head and that's actually getting in the way
that's right. So there's a lot of little hacks like that.
I maybe lazy I'll have to, now that you mentioned I'll have to revisit this.
Yeah.
But I have convinced myself that I don't need to read faster because that's not
ultimately the bottleneck, the bottleneck is in the me thinking about stuff.
In fact, I like reading with really slowly or so.
I convinced myself <laugh> because I ultimately,
it's not about gaining more information.
It's about time spent thinking deeply. Yes, yes. Um,
but maybe that's just me being very lazy cuz yes, it's true.
It's important to think deeply, but maybe I could speed up the,
the consumption of information. Well.
It's fine. It's I, I, I like to be dynamic actually. So, um,
usually speed reading initially and that diffused that internal dialogue for me.
Cuz when I was reading one word at a time, I was having that two,
you almost get a feedback in your own head.
Mm-hmm <affirmative> you're reading the word out loud and it's shouting your
thoughts. Yeah. If you're speed or reading, you can't do that. Yeah. You just,
you're taking in groups of words at a time. So you can't uh, you know,
internally verbalize it I guess. And then I also am really big on annotating,
underlining writing in the margins. Uh, I prefer a physical book,
but I also read the Kindle a lot cuz it's just so convenient, you know,
anywhere you're waiting in line or every night before bed,
I'm reading my Kindle. Um, and I also advocate rereading a lot.
So if you, on something that, you know, struck you at a deep level,
you found particularly fascinating. Like you have to listen to that,
that's your, I don't know your mind or your spirit signal,
that that is something meaningful to you and you should, you know,
to your point, reread it, sit with it for a long time, write about it.
Um, and that,
that becomes the ultimate triumvirate of, of synthesizing an idea.
Actually,
if you can read about it and then write about it and then go
and talk about it, you get this crystallization of understanding.
That's just not possible doing any one of the three or any two of the three. Um,
so I definitely highly recommend people to do that. Um,
and in terms of how are those books difficult? I mean, in every way,
they're all long books. Uh,
in terms of density,
I would say Lila is the less the least dense,
maybe maps of meaning. I don't know,
but maps of meaning and human action are both extremely dense,
but they're just you, I had to read those books very slow.
You just have to take your time with 'em. Um, to,
to give you an idea with Jordan, Peter, he said this a lot with maps of meaning.
He spent three hours a day writing for 15 years to write that book.
It's probably, I think it's a 600 page book. He said he estimates,
he rewrote every sentence in the book,
50 times five zero to try and get it, you know, just perfected.
And when you read these sentences, he <affirmative>,
you can tell that he rewrote it 50 times.
I've uh, I've used actually in for space repetition. Um,
it's like a piece of it's an app. I'm not sure if you're familiar with it,
but it allows you to load in, uh,
facts or terms or entire paragraphs.
And then it brings them, uh,
you review them every day mm-hmm <affirmative> and then it brings them up less
and less often over time. Hmm.
As you show yourself being able to remember the thing that, uh,
you wanted to memorize and oftentimes what I'm reading,
what I want to memorize is the key idea. Uh,
but also like I use it for I'm terrible with names.
So I started to use it for names too, of names of people, names of, uh,
like people that I wanna remember. Yeah.
And also throughout history and also my own personal life, but also events,
you know, dates to me are usually not important,
but sometimes dates are really important. Mm. And so it's really useful.
I recommend highly Naval think mentioned a piece of software called
read wise or something like that. That I hope I'm saying that correctly.
It's something like that.
And what it does is it goes to your highlights from your Kindle
or the various places where you highlight stuff that integrates, um,
the good reads and it does the same kind of space repetition,
but for things you've highlighted. Mm that's super cool.
It's it sends an email every day and it's been really,
I recommend it highly cuz it,
it send like to me in email form a selection of the
things I've highlighted in previous things I've read and it's like this weird,
like
shock shock to your memory of that sprinkles. Like I'll have a,
I have way probably way too much Orwell in there. And it just kind of like,
it brings you back and these years there, because what you realize,
depending on how you highlight, but at least for me,
and I think it's probably true for a lot of people,
the things you've highlighted had at that moment and like an emotional impact on
you. Mm-hmm <affirmative> yeah.
And so like these things are just like hitting you hard again. Yeah. It's like,
whoa. Uh, it might not be meaningful to anyone else except you. And it, uh,
it's something I recommend,
you never know with these like hacks or tools and so on.
Like what's actually BS and what, what is amazing.
And that one is kind of amazing. So at least for me it,
it works for me in Naval. I think I think's the one read wise,
you said read wise. Yeah, I definitely. Or something close to that. Yeah.
It could be read something else, like wealth or something.
Uh, the one other thing I, I really like,
and this is more of a new one is I used to always listen to music at the gym
mm-hmm <affirmative> but now I've just cuz I'm so backlogged on podcast. Right.
They're just, there's so many,
I exclusively listen to podcasts when I'm walking or when I'm at the gym,
anytime I'm doing something that I can't know read basically.
And I think there's something really special about exercise and ideation
<laugh>. I mean, I, I don't know if this happens to everyone,
but my creative juices just go ballistic when I'm at the gym.
Like I hit a certain point of, I guess, heart rate and you're sweating enough,
then it, the ideas just start to flow. Yeah. So I'm basically at the gym now,
listening to podcasts,
exercise is as fast as I can to try to get to that state of, um,
you know, where you're diss STR your strenuous exercise, I guess you would say.
And then I'm end up typing notes into my phone as fast as I can with all these
ideas that are flowing. So I've, I've created a lot of good writing out of that.
It's it's kind of, so I, I do running, uh, quite a bit,
so running outside and uh,
I'll listen to <laugh> I've been okay.
I told myself this has been going on for about a year. Uh,
is I only listen like the,
the stuff that's either world war II or world war I related. So Hitler, Stalin,
like, like difficult historical stuff. Um,
and also listen to brown noise. So those are the two modes.
So brown noise helps me. It's like white noise, but like deeper,
I guess it helps me remove the world. And at the gym,
there's a lot of distrac when you're running. There's a lot of distractions.
It helps me remove the world.
So one I'll be listening to difficult historical ideas.
And then when my mind is all of a sudden starting to generate ideas,
I'll listen to brown noise and I'll then force myself to think it's kind of,
it's meditative in a sense. And your mind wants to be lazy. You want to,
you, it's hard, man,
like running and thinking in the sense that some of the ideas that come into
your head are pretty heavy. Uh it's about your own life.
It's all your own demons come. Yeah.
But also just difficult ideas that require you thinking through and
persevering through that.
Like not letting yourself get lazy and like thinking through it has,
has been really, for me, rewarding in the same way that you're,
you're saying is it is for you. It's true that like podcasts and music,
like, um, shallow,
like funny podcast or music have been a kind of filler distraction,
but informational podcasts,
like podcasts that have some depths of ideas or audio books have been,
uh, truly rewarding.
I try to listen now less and less to podcasts that are just fun.
Mm-hmm <affirmative> cuz I feel like I enjoy too much.
Don't allow my mind to get bored and to think through stuff mm-hmm <affirmative>
to, uh, to explore ideas. Yeah. It's so easy to fill the, the space
that, uh, usually would be thought filled with thought instead,
fill it with fun podcasts.
Like there's a bunch of comedy podcasts I really enjoy.
So there's value to that. Of course. But you,
you have to realize it's entertainment. It's not, uh, it's, it's not, um,
you don't get much value except entertainment.
Right, right. And there's utility to the boredom too.
I think where to give your mind the space,
I guess your subconscious, maybe the space to chew on some of these problems,
right? Where you've I embodied so much knowledge, you know,
you've highlighted and thought about something,
but then you need to stop thinking about it for a while and let it marinate in
the subconscious. And then, you know,
these flashes of insight that people have described.
Sometimes I get 'em in the middle of the night.
Like I just wake up from a dream and have them and I gotta write it down or
sometimes it's, uh, in nature taking a walk.
But I think that's very important too.
We can't just brute force our way into understanding, you know,
there's this interplay between kind of the brute force reading intake and then
just relaxing, meditating, sleeping, being bored, uh,
letting your subconscious do the, the heavy.
Lifting. And there's a, like,
you should be aware of the fact that there's a war for your attention going on.
So there's a lot of,
there's been better and better and better mechanisms that are designed to steal
your attention.
So I kind of see it as a war zone between my right,
for boredom and the internet wanting your attention. In fact, um,
clubhouse as an app has been,
I'm not gonna use clubhouse much anymore cuz there's some aspect of my own inner
loneliness and whatever it is that pulled me into clubhouse a little bit too
much to where,
where it robbed me from that lonely time alone where I sit and listen to Bruce
Springsteen and think about life. Right.
<laugh> so I wanna that's way more important <laugh> that's way. Well, yeah,
at least, you know, it's all in balance cuz there is uh,
a clubhouse like a lot of these social networks when you use right.
Can be a way to discover new ideas,
new people it's but the boredom and just being alone with your thoughts is,
uh, price us.
Absolutely. And you gotta know yourself, right?
Like it took me a long time to realize I need solitude. Yeah.
Like just how I'm wired, how I'm built. I need like an hour, a day solitude.
So you gotta listen to that part of yourself.
You might be compromising something like that where you feel like you always
need to be with your girlfriend or whatever it may be.
But I would suggest listening to that voice. Yeah. I.
Tried to <laugh> I tried to remember things that made me feel good over time.
Like long term had positive impact and long term had negative impact and
do more of the former less as a latter. Yeah.
We don't often <laugh> think like that. You know, we,
we talked offline about like carnivore diets, for example,
I try to remember that carbs. Don't make me feel good. Yeah.
That's what's in the moment. It's hard to remember that it's hard,
but you have to remember that that that's the case and in the same way
exercise, it's hard to remember that exercise makes me feel good.
Uh, like especially.
When it's time to go to the gym, especially last.
Time to go to the gym.
But you should remember that because the kind of person you are without exercise
for me, just like he beautifully said that you have to know yourself,
the kind of person I am without exercise is a less good person,
a person, a person I'm less proud of.
Yeah. The food thing is so hard by the way. I still, you know, I,
I can't tell you how many times I've learned the lesson.
Like don't eat that <laugh> but then you know, you go a few weeks of not eating,
whatever that is and you're you're feeling good. Yeah.
And then you're you're I dunno, something creeps up inside. You're like, ah,
you could just have one or you could just do this, but for me it's sugar.
Like sugar just makes me feel terrible. But I always not always,
but if it's been a long time, I started to make that exception in my mind like,
oh, you can have a little bit. Yeah. And then I eat it and I feel terrible.
So I don't know how many times I've done that dance, but.
<Laugh>, it's not cool. Well, it depends on how painful it is.
And then you learn the lesson. I've I haven't,
I actually embraced the fact that I'll never learn the lesson with vodka. Mm.
Every time I drink, especially with Russians <laugh> is like, I,
I quit drinking every, and then I forget there's like a slow drop off.
It'll be like a two weeks. And then Naro.
<Laugh>.
Very good. So it never makes me feel good.
It never results in anything good. Um,
except the beautiful social chaos. Yeah.
Which is a ultimately somehow there's value to chaos too. Yes. You know,
there there's value to that.
Whatever the hell stupid stuff you do when you get trashed the,
over the top emotion of love usually or whatever. Yeah.
Camaraderie there's value to that too. Like that's as I get older,
I realize cuz uh, the,
the world sometimes,
especially when you get older and the world wants you to be an adult
in order to maintain the youthful spirit, you have to use all the tools you can.
Yeah. And alcohol is one of them, right. To do all the stupid that you can,
even if you're like getting older.
To lower the inhibitions and lower the, again, it's that,
that taste of uncertainty that is the sweetness of life. Right.
To be able to go out and be a flair at a party and not really know what you're
gonna do. And it's, we, we have this draw to the wild side of life.
Uh, as much as we try and build up order around ourselves,
I think there's always gonna be an appetite for that. Um, I've always,
most of my life, I've always been a social drinker,
but I actually gave up alcohol a year ago. And um, I would add that to the,
the idea, uh,
the repertoire for dealing with bigger ideas because alcohol's fun.
It's a me, you know, good times
it can be analgesic. It can do all,
you can give you all these benefits if you use, uh, in the right amounts.
But I got to the point personally,
where I was trying to wrestle with these ideas that are just so much bigger than
me, that I,
and I have this backlog of books that was growing faster than I could read them.
That I just reached a point where I decided, um,
I wanted to start making sacrifices toward attaining that and alcohol was just
an easy one, you know, it's you spend,
even if you just drink socially on the weekends,
you're probably spending five to 10 hours drinking and then maybe another
what? Five to 10 hours recovering perhaps on the day after <affirmative>. Um,
so it, it was a difficult transition initially,
but once you get through a couple of months, I feel amazing without it,
I sleep better than ever. My workouts are better than ever.
I'm sharper than ever. I'm more lucid. So I'm,
I'm not trying to be a proponent for like not drinking,
but I just wanna say you're a proponent.
For SAC sacrifice in some I.
Sacrifice. Yes.